Let's take a look at a demo
of how specificity can work.
And to make this demo work
really particularly well,
we're gonna work from the bottom
of the stylesheet going up.
To show you that this is not a matter of
what comes later in the stylesheet is what
is applied.
I'm actually gonna start at the bottom
of the stylesheet and go backwards.
So that you can see that the cascade
isn't in effect at all in these
particular demo that I'm showing you.
This demo comes from Manuel Matuzović,
who is from HTMLHell,
a great website, I totally recommend it.
He wrote this demo originally
with just a colored square,
I've rewritten it with colors and fonts so
that you can see the big differences
between what happens as
we change selectors.
So we start here with
the words Frontend Masters,
they are taking on the style from
the browser style sheet, so it's black.
It is Times New Roman, and you'll see
here, I've added a font size of 3rem,
just to make it bigger on the screen so
you can see what's going on.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to
uncommon these styles one at a time and
show you how they take
effect here on the screen.
So the first style that I have here, which
is almost the last one in the style sheet,
the last one being the font size,
is where(p).
What is the specificity of that?
Remember where has no specificity
at all including what's inside of
the parentheses.
And so I have made it the color of
blue and the font family of Barrio,
you can see that it's changed
kind of radically there.
We can override that simply
by using our paragraph.
And so now I'm changing this to red, and a
font family called covered By Your Grace.
So that has a specificity of 001.
It is just a type selector, it's going to
take priority over where(p) even though
where(p) comes later in the style sheet.
Now, we can take advantage of classes,
you'll notice here in our
HTML we do have a class.
So I've used that here, I've changed
the color to medium orchid, and
the font family of Faster One.
And you can see that the class
is beating the paragraph,
probably something you
would expect to happen.
We're changing that again, but
adding paragraph dot, the class name
that indicates a paragraph with the class
of in this case femClass together.
And we are using the color green and
the font family of Joan.
Now, one of the tricks that you can do if
you need to increase your specificity but
you don't have access to the HTML,
is you can double up on classes.
So here we've put in femClass,
femClass, dot, dot,
next to each other to
indicate that we've declared
that class twice even though it
only appears once in the HTML.
By putting it in twice,
we have bumped up our specificity, so
the specificity here is what?
0-2-0 as opposed to earlier here on
the page where we had it as 0-1-1 or
even earlier where we had 0-1-0.
So by doubling up on those class names,
you can raise the specificity and
that is sometimes helpful.
We'll make it even stronger for
the specificity here is styling via ID,
so this is femID.
We've made the color brown, and we've made
the font family now Major Mono Display.
So of course,
the specificity there is 1,0,0.
Raise this specificity again
by putting a p in front of it.
p with the ID means that
the specificity is 1,0,1.
And now,
we have a different color and font.
We can also of course,
combine our ID and our class.
Now, our specificity's up to 1,1,0,
so we have our class and
ID together to change the font again.
We can double up on our ID to
raise our specificity to 2,0,0 and
change the font another time.
And here we are using is, so
in this particular selector,
we're saying the ID, femID,
is either the femID or
it's invalid, invalid, so
basically, we're doing a test.
So if the element with an ID of femID,
happens to also have an ID of femID,
little redundant but
it works, or something invalid,
then style it this way.
So the first item is true, the second
item is not, is applies in this case.
What is the specificity?
We would count the most specific selector
here inside of is, which would be invalid
invalid, so that counts for two, plus
the one outside of it so this is 3,0,0.
Now, comes the one that sort
of blows people's minds.
I'm back to a specificity
of just the p again, okay?
But I am changing the color
of the font via animation.
This is a little preview for what we're
gonna look at when we look at the cascade.
Anything having to do with the animation
will actually take priority,
even over the most specific
selectors that are out there.
And in this case,
as you can see it's not really moving,
so the animation is pretty
quick at zero seconds.
But it's enough to change the font
family here to a different color and
to a different font.
And then finally, just to show you
the impact of important on all of this,
the most specific one of all is when we
start throwing in our bang importance.
So here I've put a bang
important by the color,
a bang important by the font name,
and that will take priority
over everything even though it
occurs earliest in the document.
So these last two styles
that I've applied here,
these last two rules for
the importance and with the animation,
are actually the cascade taking
priority over specificity.
It's sort of a sneak preview
as to what comes next.
But prior to that, from our crazy is
selector and going further down the page,
that is all specificity that's there
in action in this particular demo.
>> There's been like thanks, great, wow,
interesting-
>> Okay.
>> Through the day so far.
But as Sanjana, I don't know,
sorry if I butchered your name,
says beautiful demo by the way.
>> Yeah, so all the thanks here to Manuel,
appreciate it.
He does great work, his blog at HTMHell,
fantastic, encourage you to read it.
>> What do you think about
the use of important?
Do you think it's overused-
>> Yes.
>> And should be avoided?
>> Yes, we're gonna talk about that though
in a couple of little segments here.
We will talk about important.
>> And then they're asking
if you could share the demo?
>> Share the demo?
>> It's on the course.
>> Yes, the course website if
you didn't join us yesterday,
this is semantics-selectors.css.education.
I think Mark is gonna put
it in the chat for you.
And we are currently on chapter five,
specificity,
and we we're just looking at part one,
the specificity demo.
And in my comments here,
I've referenced the original demo, and
then of course,
I made some adjustments to it.